[MUSIC - LEE COURINGTON, "THE
BEGINNING"]
>> The world's greatest
spiritual teachers from ancient
to modern times have shared
the view that the deepest truth
of our being is not the property
of one particular religion
or spiritual tradition but
can be found within the heart
of each person.
The poet Rumi said,
"Where is that moon
that never rises or sets?
Where is that soul that is
neither with nor without us?
Don't say it is here or there.
All creation is 'That' but
for the eyes that can see."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the story of
the Tower of Babel,
humanity fragmented into
countless languages, beliefs,
cultures, and interests.
Babel means literally
"the gate of God."
The gate is our thinking mind,
our conditioned structures.
For those who come to
realize their true nature,
their essence beyond
name and form,
they are initiated
into the great mystery
of what lies beyond the gate.
An ancient parable,
the elephant parable,
has been used to describe how
various traditions are actually
all pointing to one great truth.
A group of blind people are
each touching a different part
of an elephant, getting
a certain impression
of what an elephant is.
But the person standing
at the elephant's leg
describes the elephant
as being like a tree.
[MUSIC - DANIEL SCHMIDT
AND VICKI HANSEN,
"THE GAYATRI MANTRA"]
The person at the tail says
the elephant is like a rope.
The elephant is
like a spear, says
the one standing at the tusk.
If one touches the ear, it seems
the elephant is like a fan.
The person touching
the side is adamant
that the elephant
is like a wall.
The problem is we touch
our piece of the elephant,
and we believe our
experience is the only truth.
We don't acknowledge
or appreciate
that each person's experience
is a different facet
of the same animal.
[SINGING SANSKRIT]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The perennial philosophy
is an understanding
that all spiritual and
religious traditions
share a single universal truth,
a mystical or transcendent
reality upon which foundation
all spiritual knowledge
and doctrine has grown.
Swami Vivekananda summed
up the perennial teaching
when he said, "The
end of all religions
is the realizing
of God in the soul.
That is the one
universal religion."
In this film, when we
use the word "God,"
it is simply a metaphor
for the transcendent,
pointing to the great mystery
beyond the limited egoic mind.
To realize one's true
self or immanent self
is to realize one's
divine nature.
Every soul has the potential
to manifest a new higher
level of consciousness,
to awaken
from its slumber and its
identification with form.
The writer and
visionary Aldous Huxley,
known for his book
"Brave New World,"
also wrote a book which
he entitled "The Perennial
Philosophy," in which he writes
about the one teaching that
comes back over and
over in history, taking
the form of the culture
in which it is realized.
He writes, "The Perennial
Philosophy is expressed most
succinctly in the Sanskrit
formula 'tat tvam asi'--
'that Thou art'-- the Atman,
or immanent eternal Self,
is one with Brahman, the
absolute principle of all
existence; and the last
end of every human being is
to discover the
fact for himself,
to find out who he
or she really is."
[MUSIC - DEVA PREMAL, "OM RAM
RAMAYA"]
Each tradition is like a
facet of a jewel reflecting
a unique perspective of the same
truth while at the same time
echoing and
illuminating each other.
Whatever the language and
conceptual framework used,
all religions that reflect
the perennial teaching
have some notion that there is
a union with something greater,
something beyond us.
[SINGING SANSKRIT]
It is possible to learn from
and integrate the teachings
from one or many sources without
identifying a sense of self
with them.
It is said that all true
spiritual teachings are simply
fingers pointing to
the transcendent truth.
If we hold on to the dogma,
the teaching, for comfort,
we will be stunted in
our spiritual evolution.
To realize truth
beyond any concept
is letting go of all
clinging and attachment,
letting go of all
religious concepts.
From the ego's perspective, the
finger pointing you to Samadhi
is pointing straight
toward the abyss.
Saint John of the
Cross said, "If one
wishes to be sure of
the road they tread,
one must close their eyes
and walk in the dark."
[SINGING SANSKRIT]
Samadhi begins with a
leap into the unknown.
[THROAT SINGING]
In the ancient traditions,
in order to realize Samadhi,
it was said that one must
ultimately turn consciousness
away from all known objects,
from all external phenomena,
conditioned thoughts,
and sensations,
toward consciousness itself,
toward the inner source,
the heart, or essence,
of one's being.
In this film, when we
use the word "Samadhi,"
we are pointing to
the transcendent,
to the highest
Samadhi, which has
been named Nirvikalpa Samadhi.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
In Nirvikalpa Samadhi, there is
a cessation of self activity,
of all seeking and doing.
We can only speak about what
falls away as we approach it
and what reappears
when we return from it.
There is neither perception nor
non-perception, neither thing
nor no thing,
neither consciousness
or unconsciousness.
It is absolute, unfathomable,
and inscrutable to the mind.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
When the self
returns to activity,
there's a not knowing,
a kind of rebirth,
and everything
becomes new again.
We are left with the
perfume of the divine, which
lingers longer as one
evolves on the path.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
There are numerous types
of Samadhi described
in the ancient traditions,
and language has created
much confusion over the years.
We are choosing to
use the word "Samadhi"
to point to the
transcendent union,
but we could have used a
word from another tradition
just as easily.
Samadhi is an ancient Sanskrit
term common to the Vedic,
Yogic, and Samkhya
traditions of India
and has permeated many
other spiritual traditions.
Samadhi is the eighth limb of
Patanjali's eight limbs of yoga
and the eighth part of the
Buddha's Noble Eightfold Path.
The Buddha used
the word "nirvana,"
the cessation of vana, or the
cessation of self activity.
Patanjali described
yoga, or Samadhi,
as "chitta vritti
nirodha," the Sanskrit
meaning "cessation of the
whirlpool, or spiral, of mind."
It is a disentangling
of consciousness
from the entire matrix,
or creatrix, of mind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Samadhi does not
signify any concept,
because to realize it
requires a dropping
of the conceptual mind.
Different religions
have used various words
to describe the divine union.
In fact, the word "religion"
itself means something similar.
In Latin, "religare" means
to rebind or reconnect.
It's a similar meaning to the
word yoga, which means to yoke,
to unite the worldly
with the transcendent.
In Islam, it is reflected in
the ancient Arabic meaning
of the word "Islam" itself,
which means submission
or supplication to God.
It signifies a total
humbling or surrender
of the self structure.
Christian mystics such as
Saint Francis of Assisi,
Saint Teresa of Ãvila, and
Saint John of the Cross describe
a divine union with God,
the kingdom of God within.
In the Gospel of Thomas,
Christ said, "The kingdom
is not here or there.
Rather, the kingdom
of the Father
is spread out upon the Earth,
and men do not see it."
The works of the Greek
philosophers Plato, Plotinus,
Parmenides, and
Heraclitus, when seen
through the lens of
the perennial teaching,
point towards the same wisdom.
Plotinus teaches that the
greatest human endeavor
is to guide the human soul
towards the supreme state
of perfection and
union with the One.
The Lakota medicine
and holy man Black Elk
said, "The first peace,
which is the most important,
is that which comes
within the souls of men
when they realize their
relationship, their oneness
with the universe
and all its powers,
and when they realize that
at the center of the universe
dwells Great Spirit and
that this center is really
everywhere.
It is within each of us."
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
On the path to awakening,
unless we are in Samadhi,
there are always two polarities,
two doorways one can enter,
two dimensions--
one towards pure
consciousness, the other
towards the phenomenal world--
the upward current
toward the absolute
and the downward
current toward maya
and all that is manifested,
both seen and unseen.
The relationship between
relative and absolute
could be summed up in
the following quote
by Sri Nisargadatta Maharaj--
"Wisdom is knowing I am nothing.
Love is knowing I am everything.
And between the
two, my life moves."
What is born of this union is
a new divine consciousness.
Something is born out of
the marriage, or union,
of these polarities
or the collapse
of dualistic identification.
Yet, what is born is not a
thing, and it was never born.
Consciousness flowers,
creating something new,
creating what you could
call a perennial trinity.
God the Father,
the transcendent,
unknowable, and
changeless is united
with the Divine Feminine, which
is everything that changes.
This union brings about an
alchemical transformation,
a kind of death and birth.
In the Vedic teachings,
the divine union
is represented by two
fundamental forces--
Shiva and Shakti.
The names and faces
of the various gods
change throughout history, but
their fundamental attributes
remain.
What is born out of this union
is a new divine consciousness,
a new way of being in
the world, two polarities
inseparably one,
a universal energy
that is without center,
free of limitation.
It is pure love.
There is nothing to
be gained or lost,
because it is utterly
empty but absolutely full.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Whether it is the mystery
schools of Mesopotamia,
the spiritual traditions of
the Babylonians and Assyrians,
religions of ancient Egypt,
Nubian and Kemetic cultures
of ancient Africa, the
shamanic and native traditions
around the world, the
mysticism of ancient Greece,
the Gnostics, the nondualists,
the Buddhists, the Taoists,
Jews, Zoroastrians, Jains,
Muslims, or Christians,
one finds that
their common link is
their highest spiritual insights
have allowed their adherence
to realize Samadhi.
The actual word
Samadhi means something
like to realize the sameness
or oneness in all things.
It means union.
It is uniting all
aspects of yourself.
But do not mistake
intellectual understanding
for the actual
realization of Samadhi.
It is your stillness,
your emptiness
that unites all levels
of the spiral of life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It is through the ancient
teaching of Samadhi
that humanity can
begin to understand
the common source
of all religions
and come into alignment once
again with the spiral of life,
Great Spirit,
Dhamma, or the Tao.
The spiral is the bridge that
extends from the microcosm
to the macrocosm.
From your DNA to the
inner Lotus of energy
that extends through the chakras
to the spiral arms of galaxies,
every level of soul is
expressed through the spiral
as ever-evolving branches,
living, exploring.
True Samadhi is
realizing the emptiness
of all levels of self,
all sheaths of the soul.
The spiral is the
endless play of duality
and the cycle of life and death.
At times, we forget our
connection to the source.
The lens we look
through is very small.
And we identify with being
a limited creature creeping
upon the Earth only to once
again complete the journey back
to the source, to the
center that is everywhere.
Chuang Tzu said, "When there
is no more separation between
'this' and 'that,' it is called
the still-point of the Tao.
At the still-point in
the center of the spiral,
one can see the
infinite in all things."
The ancient mantra
"om mani padme hum"
has a poetic meaning--
one awakens, or realizes,
the jewel within the Lotus.
Your true nature awakens within
the soul, within the world,
as the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Using the hermetic principle
"as above, so below;
as below, so above,"
we can use analogies
to begin to understand the
relationship between mind
and stillness,
relative and absolute.
A way to begin to grasp
the non-conceptual nature
of Samadhi is to use the
analogy of the black hole.
A black hole is traditionally
described as a region of space
with a massive gravitational
field so powerful
that no light or
matter can escape.
New theories postulate that
all objects, from the tiniest
microscopic particles to
macrocosmic formations
like galaxies, have a black
hole or mysterious singularity
at their center.
In this analogy,
we're going to use
this new definition
of a black hole
as the center that
is everywhere.
In Zen, there are
many poems and koans
that bring us face to face
with the gateless gate.
One must pass the gateless
gate to realize Samadhi.
An event horizon is a boundary
in space-time beyond which
events cannot effect
an outside observer,
which means that whatever is
happening beyond the event
horizon is unknowable to you.
You could say that the event
horizon of a black hole
is analogous to
the gateless gate.
It is the threshold between
the self and no self.
There is no "me" that
passes the event horizon.
In the center of a black hole is
the one-dimensional singularity
containing the mass
of billions of suns
in an unimaginably small space,
effectively an infinite mass,
literally a universe in
something infinitesimally
smaller than a grain of sand.
The singularity is
something unfathomable,
beyond time and space.
According to physics,
movement is impossible.
The existence of
things is impossible.
Whatever it is,
it does not belong
to the world of perception.
Yet, it cannot be described
as merely stillness.
It is beyond stillness
and movement.
When you realize the center
that is everywhere and nowhere,
duality breaks down--
form and emptiness,
time and the timeless.
One could call it
a dynamic stillness
or a pregnant emptiness
within the center
of absolute darkness.
The Taoist teacher Lao Tzu
said, "Darkness within darkness.
The gateway to all
understanding."
The writer and comparative
mythologist Joseph Campbell
describes a recurring
symbol, part
of the perennial philosophy
which he calls the axis mundi,
the central point, or
the highest mountain,
the pole around
which all revolves,
the point where stillness
and movement are together.
From this center, a
mighty flowering tree
is realized, a Bodhi tree
that joins all worlds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Just as a sun gets sucked into
a black hole, when you approach
the Great Reality, your life
starts to revolve around it,
and you begin to disappear.
[THROAT SINGING]
As you approach
the immanent self,
it can be terrifying
to the ego structure.
The guardians of
the gate are there
to test those on their journey.
One must be willing to
face one's greatest fears
and at the same time
accept one's inherent power
to bring light to the
unconscious terrors
and the hidden beauty within.
If your mind is not moved,
if there is no self reacting,
then all phenomena
produced by the unconscious
arises and passes away.
This is the point in
the spiritual journey
where faith is most needed.
What do we mean by faith?
Faith is not the same as belief.
Belief is accepting something
on the level of mind
to bring comfort and assurance.
Belief is the mind's way
of labeling or controlling
experience.
Faith is actually the opposite.
Faith is staying in
the place of complete
not knowing, accepting whatever
arises from the unconscious.
Faith is surrendering to
the pull of the singularity,
to the dissolving, or
dismantling, of the self
in order to pass
the gateless gate.
The evolution and
structure of a galaxy
is closely tied to the
scale of its black hole,
just as your evolution
is tied to the presence
of the immanent self,
the singularity that
is your true nature.
We can't see the black hole,
but we can know about it
by the way things
move around it,
by how it interacts
with physical reality.
In the same way, we cannot
see our true nature.
The immanent self
is not a thing.
But we can observe
enlightened action.
As the Zen master Suzuki said,
"There are, strictly speaking,
no enlightened people.
There is only
enlightened activity."
We can't see it, just as
the eye cannot see itself.
We can't see it
because it is that
by which seeing is possible.
Like the black hole,
Samadhi is not nothingness,
and neither is it a thing.
It is the collapse of the
duality of thing and no thing.
There is no gate to
enter the Great Reality.
But there are infinite paths.
The paths, the dharmas,
are like an endless spiral
with no beginning and no end.
No one can pass
the gateless gate.
No one's mind has ever figured
out how, and none ever will.
No one can pass
the gateless gate.
So be no one.
Samadhi is the pathless
path, the golden key.
It is the end of our
identification with the self
structures that separate
our inner and outer worlds.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There are many
developmental models
which describe the layers,
or levels, of self structure.
We will use an example
which is very ancient.
In the "Upanishads," the sheaths
which cover the atman, or soul,
are called koshas.
Each kosha is like a mirror,
a layer of the self structure,
a veil, or level, of
maya which distracts us
from realizing our true nature,
if we are identified with it.
Most people see the
reflections and believe
that that is who they are.
One mirror reflects the animal
layer, the physical body.
Another mirror
reflects your mind--
your thoughts, your
instincts and perceptions.
Another, your inner
energy, or prana,
which you can observe
when you turn inward.
Another mirror
reflects on the level
of the imaginal, which is the
higher mind, or wisdom, layer.
And there are layers of
transcendental, or nondual,
bliss that are experienced
as one approaches Samadhi.
There are potentially countless
mirrors, or aspects of self,
that one can differentiate, and
they are constantly changing.
Most people have yet to discover
the pranic, higher mind,
and nondual bliss layers.
They don't even know they exist.
These layers are informing your
life, but you do not see them.
The hidden mirrors
actually inform our lives
more than the ones
that are visible.
They are unseen,
because, for most people,
they are not fully
illuminated by consciousness.
Like Indra's net of jewels, the
mirrors all reflect each other,
and the reflections reflect
every other reflection
infinitely.
A change on one
level simultaneously
affects all levels.
Some of these mirrors may
be left in the shadows
unless we are fortunate enough
to have a competent guide
to help us shine
light upon them.
The truth is we don't
know what we don't know.
Now, imagine that you
shatter all the mirrors.
[MUSIC CHANGES]
There's nothing reflecting
you back to yourself.
Where are you?
When the mind becomes still,
the mirrors cease to reflect.
There is no more
subject and object.
But do not mistake
the primordial state
for nothingness or oblivion.
The immanent self
is not something,
but neither is it nothing.
This source is not a thing.
It is emptiness, or
stillness, itself.
It is an emptiness that is
the source of all things.
Form is realized as
exactly emptiness.
Emptiness is realized
as exactly form.
This source is the
great womb of creation
pregnant with all possibilities.
Samadhi is the awakening of
impersonal consciousness.
Just as when you are having
a dream, upon awakening,
you realize that
everything in the dream
was just in your mind.
Upon realizing
Samadhi, it is realized
that everything in this world
is happening within levels
upon levels of energy
and consciousness.
It is all mirrors within
mirrors, dreams within dreams.
The you that you think
you are is both the dream
and the dreamer.
Whatever we say in
this film, let it go.
Don't capture it with the mind.
The soul is dreaming,
dreaming the dream of you.
The dream is everything
that is changing.
But it is possible to
realize the changeless.
This realization cannot be
understood with the limited
individual mind.
When we return from
Nirvikalpa Samadhi,
the mirrors begin
to reflect again,
and it is realized that
the world you now think you
are living in is actually you.
Not the limited you, which is
only a temporary reflection,
but you are aware
of your true nature
as the source of all that is.
This dawning of higher wisdom--
the embryo, prajna, or gnosis--
is what is born out of Samadhi.
According to the Book of
Job, Chokhma, or wisdom,
comes from nothingness.
This point of wisdom is
both infinitely small
and yet encompasses
the whole of being.
But it remains
incomprehensible until it
is given shape and form in the
palace of mirrors called Binah,
the womb carved out by higher
wisdom which gives shape
to the embryonic spirit of God.
[MUSIC - INDIAJIVA, "ABWOON
D'BASHMAYA, THE LORD'S PRAYER"]
[SINGING ARAMAIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The existence of the mirrors,
or the mind's existence,
is not a problem.
On the contrary, the error, or
aberration, of human perception
is that we identify
ourselves with it.
This illusion, that we are
the limited self, is maya.
The yogic teachings say
that to realize Samadhi,
one must observe the meditation
object until it disappears--
until you disappear
into it or it into you.
Although the language in
the various traditions
is dissimilar, at
their root, they all
point towards a cessation
of self-identification and
self-centered activity.
The Buddha always taught
in negative terms.
He taught to
investigate directly
into the working of
the self structure.
He didn't say what
Samadhi was except that it
was the end of suffering.
In Advaita Vedanta, there is
a term, "neti neti," which
means "not this, not that."
People on the path
to self-realization
inquire into their true nature,
or the nature of brahman,
by first discovering
what they are not.
Similarly, in Christianity,
Saint Teresa of Ãvila described
an approach to prayer
based on the negative path,
or via negativa, a prayer of
quiet, surrender, and union,
which is the only way to
approach the absolute.
Through this gradual
process of stripping away,
one drops anything
that is not permanent,
anything that is changing--
the mind, the ego construct,
and all phenomena,
including the hidden
layers of self.
The unconscious must
become transparent in order
to reflect the one source.
If there is some deep knowing
or some self operating
in the unconscious,
then our lives
remain locked into a
labyrinth of hidden patterns
that comprise the
undiscovered self.
When all layers of self
are revealed as empty,
then one becomes free from the
self, free from all concepts.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A turning point
in your evolution
is when you realize you
don't know who you are.
[MUSIC - DANIEL
SCHMIDT, "GATE GATE,
THE HEART SUTRA
DEEP VOICE CHANT"]
Who experiences the breath?
Who experiences the taste?
Who experiences the chant,
the ritual, the dance,
the mountain?
Witness the witness.
Observe the observer.
At first, when you
observe the observer,
you will only see
the false self.
But if you are persistent,
it will give way.
[SINGING SANSKRIT]
Inquire directly into who or
what experiences unblinkingly,
piercingly, penetratingly, with
the full force of your being.
[SINGING SANSKRIT]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There is no self that awakens.
There is no you that awakens.
What you are awakening
from is the illusion
of the separate self, from
the dream of a limited you.
To talk about it is meaningless.
There must be an actual
cessation of the self
to realize directly what it is.
And once it is realized,
there is nothing
that can be said about it.
As soon as you say something,
you are back in the mind.
I have already said too much.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We normally have three
states of consciousness--
waking, dreaming,
and deep sleep.
Samadhi is sometimes referred to
as the fourth state, the ground
state of consciousness, a
primordial awakeness that
can become present
continuously and in parallel
with the other
consciousness states.
In Vedanta, this
is called turiya.
Other terms for turiya
are Christ consciousness,
Krishna consciousness, Buddha
nature, or Sahaja Samadhi.
In Sahaja Samadhi,
the immanent self
stays present along
with the full use
of all human functions.
The stillness is unmoving
at the center of the spiral
of changing phenomenon.
Thoughts, feelings, sensations,
and energy revolve around it
at the circumference.
But the degree of
stillness, or I am-ness,
remains during outer activity,
exactly as in meditation.
It is possible that the immanent
self will remain present,
even during deep sleep, that
your awareness of "I am"
does not come and go, even as
states of consciousness change.
This is yogic sleep.
In the Song of Songs,
or the Song of Solomon,
from the Hebrew Bible, or
Old Testament, it reads,
"I sleep, but my heart waketh."
This realization of the eternal
impersonal consciousness
is reflected in the words
of Christ when he said.
"Before Abraham was, I am."
One consciousness that shines
through countless faces,
countless forms.
At first, it's like a
fragile flame borne out
of the polarities within you--
masculine penetrating
consciousness
with a surrender, or
opening, of feminine energy.
It is delicate and easily lost.
And one must take great care
to protect it and keep it alive
until it is mature.
Samadhi is simultaneously a
timeless state of consciousness
and a stage in an unfolding
development process, something
organic and growing in time.
As one spends more and more
time in Samadhi, in the now,
in the timeless, one takes
more and more direction
from the heart,
the soul, or atman
and less from the
conditioned structure.
This is how one becomes
free of the lower mind, free
of pathological thinking.
The inner wiring changes.
Energy no longer
flows unconsciously
in the old conditioned
structures,
which is another way of saying
one is no longer identified
with the self structure,
with the outer world of form.
To realize Samadhi
requires an effort so great
that it becomes a total
surrender of one's self
and a surrender so
encompassing that it
is a complete effort of one's
being, all of one's energy.
It is a balance of effort
and surrender, yin and yang,
a sort of effortless effort.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Indian mystic and yogi
Paramahamsa Ramakrishna said,
"Do not seek illumination
unless you seek it
as one whose hair is
on fire seeks a pond."
You seek it with
your whole being.
During one's ego
transcending practice,
it takes great courage,
vigilance, and perseverance
to keep the embryo
alive, to not fall back
into the patterns of the world.
It takes a willingness to
go against the current,
against the inexorable
crush of the matrix
and the grinding
wheels of samsara.
Every breath, every
thought, every action
must be for
realizing the source.
Samadhi is not realized by
effort nor is it effortless.
Let go of effort and non-effort.
It's a duality that
only exists in the mind.
The actual
realization of Samadhi
is so simple, so
undifferentiated that it
is always misconstrued
through language,
which is inherently dualistic.
There is only one
primordial consciousness
that awakens as
the world, but it
has been obscured by
many layers of mind.
Like the sun hidden behind the
clouds, as each layer of mind
is dropped, one's
essence is revealed.
As each layer of
mind is dropped,
people call it a
different Samadhi.
They give names to
different experiences
or different types of phenomena.
But Samadhi is so simple that
when you are told what it is
and how to realize it, your
mind will always miss it.
Actually, Samadhi is
not simple or difficult.
It is only the mind
that makes it so.
When there is no mind,
there is no problem,
because the mind is what needs
to stop before it is realized.
It is not a happening at all.
The most concise
teaching of Samadhi
is perhaps found
in this phrase--
"Be still and know."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How can we use words and
images to convey stillness?
How can we convey
silence by making noise?
Rather than talking
about Samadhi
as an intellectual
concept, this film
is a radical call to inaction,
a call to meditation,
inner silence, and inner prayer.
[THROAT SINGING]
A call to stop--
[MUSIC STOPS]
--stop everything that is driven
by the pathological egoic mind.
Be still and know.
No one can tell you what will
emerge from the stillness.
It is a call to act from
the spiritual heart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's like remembering
something ancient.
The soul wakes up
and remembers itself.
It has been a
sleeping passenger,
but now the emptiness
awakens and realizes itself
as all things.
You can't imagine what Samadhi
is with the limited egoic mind,
just as you can't describe to
a blind person what color is.
Your mind can't know.
It can't manufacture it.
To realize Samadhi is to
see in a different way--
not to see separate things,
but to recognize the seer.
Saint Francis of Assisi said,
"What you are looking for
is what is looking."
Once you have seen the
moon, you can recognize it
in every reflection.
The true self has
always been there.
It is in everything.
But you have not
realized its presence.
When you learn to recognize
and abide as the true self
beyond the mind and senses, it
is possible to experience awe
at the most mundane.
We become awe.
Do not try to be
free of desires,
because wanting to be free
of desires is a desire.
You can't try to be still,
because your very effort is
movement.
Realize the stillness that
is always already present.
Be the stillness and know.
When all preferences
are dropped,
the source will be revealed.
But do not cling
even to the source.
The Great Reality, Tao,
is not one, not two.
Ramana Maharshi said,
"The self is only one.
If it is limited, it is the ego.
If unlimited, it is infinite
and the Great Reality."
If you believe what is being
said, you've missed it.
If you disbelieve,
you've also missed it.
Belief and disbelief operate
on the level of mind.
They require a knowing.
But if you enter into
your own investigation,
examining all of the
aspects of your own being,
finding out who is
doing the investigating,
if you're willing to
live by the principle
"not my will but
higher will be done,"
if you're willing to
travel beyond all knowing,
then you may realize what I've
attempted to point towards.
Only then will you taste for
yourself the profound mystery
and beauty of simply existing.
There is another
possibility for life.
There is something
sacred, unfathomable
that can be discovered in the
still depths of your being,
beyond concepts, beyond dogmas,
beyond conditioned activity
and all preferences.
It is not acquired by
techniques, rituals,
or practices.
There is no "how" to get it.
There's no system.
There's no way to The Way.
As they say in Zen, it is
discovering your original face
before you were born.
It is not about adding
more to yourself.
It is becoming a
light unto oneself,
a light that dispels the
illusion of the self.
Life will always
remain unfulfilled
and the heart will
always remain restless
until it comes to rest in that
mystery beyond name and form.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[MUSIC - DANIEL SCHMIDT
AND VICKI HANSEN,
"OM SHREEM LAKSHMI"]
[SINGING SANSKRIT]